# Engineering Serendipity through Recommendations of Items with Atypical Aspects
A restaurant dinner or a hotel stay may lead to memorable experiences when guests encounter unexpected aspects that also match their interests. For example, an origami-making station in the waiting area of a restaurant may be both surprising and enjoyable for a customer who is passionate about paper crafts. Similarly, an exhibit of 18th century harpsichords would be atypical for a hotel lobby and likely pique the interest of a guest who has a passion for Baroque music. Motivated by this insight, in this paper we introduce the new task of engineering serendipity through recommendations of items withatypical aspects. We describe an LLM-based system pipeline that extracts atypical aspects from item reviews, then estimates and aggregates their userspecific utility in a measure of serendipity potential that is used to rerank a list of items recommended to the user. To facilitate system development and evaluation, we introduce a dataset of Yelp reviews that are manually annotated with atypical aspects and a dataset of artificially generated user profiles, together with crowdsourced annotations of user-aspect utility values. Furthermore, we introduce a custom procedure for dynamic selection of in-context learning examples, which is shown to improve LLM-based judgments of atypicality and utility. Experimental evaluations show that serendipity-based rankings generated by the system are highly correlated with ground truth rankings for which serendipity scores are computed from manual annotations of atypical aspects and their user-dependent utility. Overall, we hope that the new recommendationtaskandtheassociated system presented in this paper catalyze further research into recommendation approaches that go beyond accuracy in their pursuit of enhanced user satisfaction.

This repository contains the datasets described in the paper above.
